      Stephen Crane 
      By the age of 22 Stephen Crane had composed his great novel The Red Badge of Courage, and only six years later died of tuberculosis having created a significant set of masterpieces amazing for someone so short-lived.
      Crane's revolutionary work introduced vital new subject matter, especially with his focus on and understanding of underclass characters, and his exploration of social forces which dominated their lives.  More important may have been his experimental 'impressionistic' method of presenting the interplay of dramatic sensations and emotions.  The masterworks he created in multiple genres'novel, short story, poetry'during a single decade can be matched by very few writers who outlived him by 40 or 50 years.  
      Born in Newark, New Jersey on November 1, 1871, he was the 14th child of Jonathan Crane, a Methodist Episcopal church minister who wrote many religious texts, and his wife Mary, daughter of clergyman and a popular spokeswoman for the anti-alcohol Women's Christian Temperance Union. A sickly yet intelligent child, Crane was already reading at the age of 4.  In 1887 he became a student at Claverack College, excelling in baseball and in the school's military program.  Crane transferred to Lafayette College in 1890 for one semester, then to Syracuse University, seldom attending classes at either, focusing on baseball and social activities at both.  
      At age 16, Crane had begun working summers at his brother Townley's local news bureau, and by age 19 had determined on a writing career. He first published journalism under his own name in February 1892, an article about Henry Stanley's African quest to discover the fate of missionary David Livingstone.  During this period he also anonymously published several prose sketches and short stories.
      At the age of 20, living with his brother Edmund in New Jersey, exploring aspects of life alien to his deeply religious upbringing, Crane found himself attracted to impoverished districts of nearby New York City, especially the saloons, dance halls, and brothels of The Bowery, and determined to be the first to write about it truthfully. In 1892, he began a relationship with a married woman, Lily Brandon Munroe, who over the following six years repeatedly refused to run away with him.  
      While achieving only modest success as a free-lance writer, in 1893 Crane self-published his first novel Maggie: A Girl of the Streets, the tragic story of a principled young woman of the slums who becomes a victim of circumstances.  Crane managed to sell very few copies, was desperate for money, suffered from depression, but remained determined to succeed.  He had heard Civil War stories as a boy, received military training from Civil War veterans while in school, and read many articles about the Civil War as a young adult, but believed the printed texts focused almost exclusively on what the soldiers did, failing to truthfully communicate the soldiers' sensations or emotions. Determined to capture the personal essence of warfare, Crane began writing sketches about men in battle, afterward commenting that without realizing it during much of his boyhood he had been preparing to write The Red Badge of Courage.   
      During the next year Crane supported himself as a free-lance journalist during the day, worked on the novel mostly from midnight to the early hours of the morning, and wrote free verse in the meantime, sometimes several poems in a day.  The Bacheller-Johnson Newspaper Syndicate accepted the novel in 1894.  In the first two weeks of December, when Crane was barely 23 years old, the novel was serialized in several newspapers to excellent reviews.  
      In late January 1895, the Bacheller Syndicate sent him on an extensive trip through the American Midwest and South, and then to Mexico, returning to New York in May.  His book of experimental poetry, The Black Riders, was commercially published that month but received poor reviews.  Though having achieved some fame for his novel, he still struggled financially, living in near poverty, sometimes eating only one good meal a day, and constantly smoking despite his poor health.  
      Impressed by the popularity of the novel's serialized version, Appleton published The Red Badge of Courage as a book in September 1895, two months before Crane's 24th birthday.  The novel received excellent reviews, remained a best seller for the remainder of the year, and went through 11 printings by 1896. 
      In November 1896, while in Jacksonville, FL waiting to take a ship to Cuba to report on the war there, Crane met and became attached to Cora Taylor, a prominent woman who had abandoned two husbands and was the proprietor of a local bawdy house.  On New Year's Eve he boarded the SS Commodore bound for Cuba carrying $700 in gold (about $25,000 today) for expenses.  About 16 miles from Jacksonville the ship sank, Crane and others spent a day and a half trying to reach land before the boat overturned and the exhausted men finally made it to shore in Daytona, though one of them drowned.  Crane had lost all his money, but Cora brought him back to Jacksonville.  Newspaper reports treated Crane as a hero, and the experience provided the basis for his great short story 'The Open Boat' which he wrote a few weeks later and published in March for $300 (over $10,000 today).
      That same month he and Cora sailed to cover the Greco-Turkish war, arriving in Athens in early April.  There they both sent stories to American newspapers, she becoming the first female correspondent for that war.  After the 30-day war ended, they lived together in England as Mr. and Mrs. Crane.  His new novel The Third Violet received negative reviews, and though The Red Badge of Courage still sold well he badly needed money and rapidly wrote several short stories, among them some quite good ('The Monster' and 'Death and the Child'), some recognized masterpieces ('The Bride Comes to Yellow Sky' and 'The Blue Hotel').   
      On February 15,1898 the USS Maine exploded in Havana Harbor, sparking the Spanish-American War.  On assignment for Blackwood's Magazine he left England shortly after, despite his failing health, almost certainly due to the pulmonary tuberculosis which had afflicted him since childhood.  Over three months he filed 20 dispatches from Cuba, and carried messages to commanding officers under fire, earning formal praise from the military for his "material aid during the action".  Sent back to America in early July, he was diagnosed with both yellow fever and malaria. A few months later he returned to Cuba, filed a few more dispatches, finally leaving for England and a return to Cora in January 1899, suffering from ever more severe money problems.  He began writing furiously despite worsening health.  Late that year he experienced a severe pulmonary hemorrhage, and more early in the next year.
      On May 28, Crane and Cora arrived at a health spa in Badenweiler, Germany, where eight days later he died at the age of 28 on June 5, 1900.  His body was returned to America where he was buried in Evergreen Cemetery in Hillside, NJ.
